posix arch: support building on aarch64 / allow host-specific cmake includes (#24843)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: arch/posix/CMakeLists.txt

# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

# @Intent: Detect native posix architecture (see 'man 1 arch')
execute_process(COMMAND arch OUTPUT_VARIABLE BUILD_ARCH OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE)

# @Intent: Set any *necessary* arch-specific compile / linker options so native_posix Just Works (TM)
if (${BUILD_ARCH} STREQUAL "aarch64")
    # The -fPIC option is required for case 1, but does not hurt case 2
    # case 1: (64-bit OS, 64-bit userspace)
    # case 2: (64-bit OS, 32-bit userspace)

>     zephyr_compile_options(-fPIC)

Reviewer: I cannot test it, but I really doubt this will work for native_poxis(_32) as is. So I'd add a if !CONFIG_64BIT => error

Reviewer 2: which is probably why he safeguarded the compile option with `if (CONFIG_64BIT)`

Reviewer: This comment was related to a completely different content of this PR around this line, and is not applicable anymore as the PR is now.

Reviewer 2: got it.

# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

# @Intent: Detect host architecture (see 'man 1 arch')
execute_process(
  COMMAND
  arch
  OUTPUT_VARIABLE
  BUILD_ARCH
  OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE

> )

Reviewer 2: This will not work on windows.
Is that acceptable ?
After all we are using a cross compiler, so I assume it should be possible to build on windows.

Author: Is `native_posix` supported under windows to begin with?

Author: Also, on the machine I was testing on, I originally was cross-compiling from aarch64-linux-gnu to arm-non-eabi :-) I know it sounds masochistic but really it's not that bad.

Reviewer: @tejlmand native_posix is meant to be used to compile targeting your host, so you can test and debug in your own workstation. It uses the host libC, and the host kernel APIs (it requires the kernel offering POSIX threads and other POSIX goodies).
Today I do not think it is really possible to crosscompile from Windows, and would not be too useful to do so (It is a quite bizarre use case, like people developing Linux apps in Windows, in which case they probably end up using WSL or so, which should then work).
Crosscompiling from one Linux platform to another would still be possible, but I would see it as a niche (e.g. using cheaper HW for multidevice tests yet wanting a Linux host below Zephyr).
In principle the POSIX arch can target any POSIX compatible OS, but in reality it is only working on Linux so far (and so far only x86).
Running natively on the Windows kernel is not possible at all or intended by design.

Reviewer 2: @aescolar I know the target `native_posix` is for local host compilation (and I'm not sure that will work on windows in first place, unless you use WSL, cygwin, or similar), I just got tricked by @cfriedt setting cross compiler at first (which is why I edited the comment).

But the question still remains valid, do we want to call out to host commands that may not be available on a system that we are supporting without some safeguard ?

People tend to copy-paste, and suddenly such code could show up in other parts of the build system, breaking it for windows users.
Therefore I would prefer if there were a generic way for doing this test, or ensure a `find_program()` is used, so that proper error message can be printed to user if running on a system where `arch` for some reason is not available.

Reviewer: Fair enough. I guess it could try call arch and if it cant throw a warning but assume x86_64 which is the most typical case

Reviewer 2: as minimum:
```
find_program(ARCH_EXECUTABLE arch)

if(${ARCH_EXECUTABLE} STREQUAL ARCH_EXECUTABLE-NOTFOUND)
  # Error out or warning ?
else()
  execute_process(
    COMMAND
    ${ARCH_EXECUTABLE}
    OUTPUT_VARIABLE
    BUILD_ARCH
    OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE
  )
endif()
```

Author: If it's easier to digest, we can use the POSIX-required `uname -m`.

Reviewer 2: > Executable should exist on each platform that is POSIX-compiliant.

which windows is not.

As the Zephyr build system is also supporting windows, then there are a couple of reason why calls to host tools should be done with care.
- The tool may not be available, which is why `find_program` is used, and that goes in general.
  `west`, `dtc`, `c compiler`, etc. are all looked up using `find_program`
- Users may see this code, and consider this a nice way to do such testing, and copy it into other parts of the build system, and then refer: `But it's done like that in xyz.cmake`.

The support for multiple OS'es is also why `python` is used, and not `sed`, `awk`, and similar tools.

And then finally for my own sake.
Whenever I review CMake code, I prefer not to consider whether this part of CMake code might be executed on windows or not.

Reviewer 2: A possibility would also be to extend your python script:
`python -c 'import platform; print(platform.machine())'
returns `x86_64` on Linux, AMD64 on windows 64 bit.

Unsure what 32 bit systems return as the Python docs are a bit brief on this: https://docs.python.org/3.8/library/platform.html#platform.machine

but for this small task, using `find_program(ARCH ...)` and then `if(${ARCH_EXECUTABLE} STREQUAL ARCH_EXECUTABLE-NOTFOUND)` the simplest approach.

Author: Nice - that works really well. Also, found `CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME`. 

I wonder if it would make sense to split things out into `CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME`.`CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR`.cmake and then just include the one file (if it exists? is that possible?).

I'm not a CMake expert by any means, so thanks for the tips :-)

# @Intent: Set any *necessary* arch-specific compile / linker options so native_posix Just Works (TM)
if (${BUILD_ARCH} STREQUAL "aarch64")
  execute_process(
    COMMAND
    ${PYTHON_EXECUTABLE}
    ${ZEPHYR_BASE}/scripts/user_wordsize.py
    OUTPUT_VARIABLE
    AARCH64_USERSPACE_BITS
    OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE
  )
  if (CONFIG_64BIT)
    if (${AARCH64_USERSPACE_BITS} STREQUAL "32")
      message(WARNING
        "CONFIG_64BIT=y but this Aarch64 machine has a 32-bit userspace.\n"

>         "Setting COINFIG_64BIT=n"

Author: OK, so then is the concensus is to keep the script that checks what the word-size of userspace is and error-out if it does not match the value of `CONFIG_64BIT`?

      )
      SET(CONFIG_64BIT OFF CACHE BOOL "CONFIG_64BIT=n" FORCE)
    endif()
  else ()
    if (${AARCH64_USERSPACE_BITS} STREQUAL "64")
      message(WARNING
        "CONFIG_64BIT=n but this Aarch64 machine has a 64-bit userspace.\n"
        "Setting COINFIG_64BIT=y"
      )
      SET(CONFIG_64BIT ON CACHE BOOL "CONFIG_64BIT=y" FORCE)
    endif()
  endif ()

>   if (CONFIG_64BIT)

Reviewer 2: Why not ?
He may still be on 32bit userspace, and having `CONFIG_64BIT=n`, in which case everything is fine, and `-fPIC` below will not be added as compile option.

Although I agree he could move the `-fPIC` code line below  into the previous `if (CONFIG_64BIT)` body.

>   if (CONFIG_64BIT)

Reviewer: You can ignore this particular comment of mine, not worthwhile.

# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

# @Intent: Detect host architecture (see 'man 1 arch')
execute_process(
  COMMAND
  arch
  OUTPUT_VARIABLE
  BUILD_ARCH
  OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE
)

# @Intent: Set any *necessary* arch-specific compile / linker options
if (${BUILD_ARCH} STREQUAL "aarch64")

  # For Aarch64, multilib is not an actively pursued solution for with most
  # distributions. Userspace is (generally) either 32-bit or 64-bit but not
  # both.

  # @Intent: Call a script to get userspace wordsize for comparison with CONFIG_64BIT
  execute_process(
    COMMAND
    ${PYTHON_EXECUTABLE}
    ${ZEPHYR_BASE}/scripts/user_wordsize.py
    OUTPUT_VARIABLE
    AARCH64_USERSPACE_BITS
    OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE
  )
  if (CONFIG_64BIT)
    if (${AARCH64_USERSPACE_BITS} STREQUAL "32")
      message(WARNING
        "CONFIG_64BIT=y but this Aarch64 machine has a 32-bit userspace.\n"
        "Setting COINFIG_64BIT=n"
      )

>       SET(CONFIG_64BIT n CACHE BOOL "CONFIG_64BIT=n" FORCE)

Reviewer 2: error out also means there is no need to pollute the CMake cache with this variable, which is actually a Kconfig setting.

# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

> # @Intent: Set necessary compiler & linker options that apply globally for OS

Reviewer: Minor: OS & ARCH are very ambiguous in this context.

I would change this comments to say something like:
"Set necessary compiler & linker options for this host OS"
"Set necessary compiler & linker options for this host architecture"
"Set necessary compiler & linker options for this specific host OS & architecture"

Author: Done!

> include(${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME}.cmake OPTIONAL)
> 
> # @Intent: Set necessary compiler & linker options that apply globally for ARCH
> include(${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR}.cmake OPTIONAL)
> 
> # @Intent: Set necessary compiler & linker options for the specific OS-ARCH tuple
> include(${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME}.${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR}.cmake OPTIONAL)

Reviewer 2: This is really changing current behavior.
Have you ensured this will work as expected on all platforms / boards ?
One thing is to ensure we are not breaking officially supported platforms, but there are still platforms / toolchains which are not officially supported, but still works, and people are using.

Also, this means each platform needs a file, even if the content is identical to another systems file.
But it is also nice to split into logical groups, so maybe something like:
```suggestion
if(EXISTS ${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME}.${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR}.cmake)
  # @Intent: Set necessary compiler & linker options for the specific OS-ARCH tuple
  include(${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME}.${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR}.cmake)
else()
  if (CONFIG_64BIT)
    # some gcc versions fail to build without -fPIC
    zephyr_compile_options(-m64 -fPIC)
    zephyr_link_libraries(-m64)
  else ()
    zephyr_compile_options(-m32)
    zephyr_link_libraries(-m32)
  endif ()
endif()
```

that way we ensure current behavior is not changing, while allowing the flexibility of placing platform specific files.
Let's wait with extending with `${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR}.cmake` and `${CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME}.cmake` until needed.
We should in general try to minimize host dependent variations, although it is needed in some case, like this PR shows.

Author: See previous [comment](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/24843#discussion_r422088474)

# SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

> execute_process(COMMAND arch OUTPUT_VARIABLE BUILD_ARCH OUTPUT_STRIP_TRAILING_WHITESPACE)

Reviewer: Would you be so kind as to add a comment around here describing what this is doing?
I'm hoping for something like:
`# Detect the host architecture, so we can set the appropriate compile options flags depending also on the selected native_posix word size.
Otherwise this change adds to the mystic feel of our cmake files

if (${BUILD_ARCH} STREQUAL "aarch64")

> 	zephyr_compile_options(-fPIC)

Reviewer: (Disclaimer I do not have any experience compiling in an ARM environment)
* Maybe a stupid question, but, do we know in general if the ABI defaults to lp64 in aarch64? (and/or would it need to be specified explicitly?)
* I guess that with this code as is only native_posix_64 compiles as expected?
  * And if that is the case I guess a `if (CONFIG_64BIT)` before this line and an else below with an error saying something like "only native_posix_64 is supported so far in aarch64" would be needed.
  * Or a change so that `-mabi=ilp32` / `-mabi=lp64` is selected depending on `CONFIG_64BIT` (and whatever else would be needed)

Author: It's a bit tricky. Since Aarch64 is not multilib capable, it doesn't really make sense to specify the abi for the native compiler.
However, `-fPIC` does work regardless of whether the system is running in 32-bit mode or 64-bit mode and it is required for 64-bit mode.

Reviewer: Uhm..
One clarification: CONFIG_64BIT is set when you select the target (board) you build for. So if you `-DBOARD=native_posix_64` you are asking to build targeting native_posix_64 which sets CONFIG_64BIT (just like when you select a RISCV-64 based board. Note that native_posix* is the only not-crosscompiled target)
If you target native_posix you are explicitly asking for the 32 bit version.
So, in that regard, if somebody asks for native_posix_64 and you decide for them to build the 32bit version (because that's the only user space they have) you would be "cheating", and probably confusing them. In that case, and if you wanted to be extra nice, I would just error out with a nice explanation ("You can't build native_posix_64 in a 32bit OS")

> Option 1:
> CONFIG_64BIT is not set by default on y machine, and the build fails (as it should?)

=> The fault in this case is in selecting native_posix(_32).

> Option 2:
> Aarch64 requires -fPIC but it also does not hurt to use it for Aarch32. Use it as a blanket option?

That should be fine. I do not have any quarrel with setting this option always :)

> I guess the underlying question is: is it "bad" to run native_posix tests on aarch64 without caring if it is 32-bit or 64-bit?

Not worse than in x86: It should just not work: if you try to build for one of them, it won't if you do not have the libC for that one (32/64), or fail to run later if the loader cannot handle it.

Reviewer: Note that the only proper way to support both native_posix(_32) and native_posix_64 is having multilib support in your host. If you don't, then you can only use one. And that is probably just fine for whoever is trying to build native_posix in ARM.

endif ()

> if (${BUILD_ARCH} STREQUAL "x86_64")

Reviewer 3: CMake supports `elseif(...)`

Reviewer: & ending it with an else() with a warning "unknown architecture, couldn't select word-size specific compile options, expect problems" would be nice. (But I'd expect native_posix (not 64) to compile without problems in an x86 linux with the -m32 as is here)

> if (CONFIG_64BIT)

Reviewer 3: Nits: These should be indented with 2 spaces.
